Reject decision in email from Journal of Conflict resolution on 7/25/2021



Comments to the Author
The manuscript addresses situations in which two parties to a conflict have the option, at the beginning of an infinite sequence of periods, of maintaining a permanently peaceful relationship or of having a fight that repeats itself every period from then on. To this end, the author(s) develop(s) a formal framework that is a variation on the treatment of infinitely repeated games and the possibility of cooperation based on grim-trigger strategies.

Compared to the standard framework of infinitely repeated games, there are two relevant variations: First, players have asymmetric information about the relevant discount rate that the two counterparts use to determine present values of future payoffs. Second, players have the ability to modify payoffs in the events of peace and conflict through "concessions". The player making the concession modifies the payoffs of the other player and the other player has a choice on how to use the concessions. Concessions can also change beliefs about players’ types. A further extension of this framework is to introduce a mediation mechanism that ultimately consists of changing the role/use of concessions.

The introduction of asymmetric information about the discount rate into the infinitely repeated Prisoners' Dilemma is an important variation. However, this variation has been treated in the literature. The work of Maor and Solan (2015), which the authors were presumably unaware of, studies the infinitely repeated Prisoner's Dilemma when players initially know only their own discount factors and the distribution from which the opponent's discount factor was randomly drawn. This work also first gives a well-informed and careful overview of infinitely repeated games with incomplete information, and gives an equilibrium analysis that is less intuitive relative to Sections 3.1 and 3.2, but very precise and more complete in terms of game theory.

As an original innovation of the paper remains the introduction of concessions, i.e. here the costly manipulation of the payoffs of the opponent and of beliefs, and later in Section 7.6 the implementation of such concessions within the framework of a mechanism ("mediator"). These differ from comparative static considerations, because they transform the game into a signaling game, since the concessions chosen can change the beliefs of the opponent.  These are interesting considerations.

I find some theoretical assumptions somewhat special when contrasting this game structure with the empirical problem of the dynamics of conflict. For example, only in a period preceding the infinitely repeated Prisoners' Dilemma do the counterparts have the opportunity to change the payoffs from cooperation or from noncooperation once and for all. In later periods, the possibility of concessions or of further concessions no longer exists, but the effects of concessions persist in the payoffs permanently and for all future periods. From a model theoretic point of view, this is a clever solution, because it logically separates the signaling game from the infinitely repeated Prisoner's Dilemma problem almost completely. The payoffs in the respective continuation games are well determined, and so the complications of a perfect Bayesian game are (almost) eliminated. However, when it comes to concrete ongoing conflicts, changes in the payoff structures seem to be as important as gradual learning processes. In many cases, it seems to be the very nature of conflicts that they drag on for many periods, but then sooner or later they can be brought to a resolution after all. In a sense, a theory is being developed here in which conflicts either never erupt (because the quasi-cooperative equilibrium is being played out), or erupt and persist forever.
This leads back to the questions regarding anecdotal or systematic empirical evidence on conflict. The article frequently makes connections between the theoretical framework and specific historical contexts (e.g., the Armenia-Azerbaijan conflict on page 2, the Cyprus conflict on page 9, the civil war in Sri Lanka on page 9, the Cold War on page 10). It is certainly good to establish an empirical basis for theoretical analysis. These references might not be sufficiently precise, however. The paper would gain a lot from a detailed and precisely documented case study, in which 1:1 correspondence between the historical context and the building blocks of the model applies. As it stands, the theoretical model is more like a hypothetical possibility and a contribution to abstract theory.

References:
Maor, Cy and Solan, Eilon (2015): “Cooperation under incomplete information on the discount factors”. International Journal of Game Theory, 44(2), p. 321-346.